I have two too louds, two too softs.
Well, how's this then? All right? We have to begin
in order to get through our program and get on with
the next sessions. I have a few comments to make,
and we have a few other brief comments, and then
we'll get on to the major event, the Pilgrim Award.
I, of course, although it is the third day, want to
offer an official welcome to you on behalf of the
conference, SFRA 83, and also the Science Fiction
Research Association. We have among our midst not
only you people, our members, but also a number of
distinguished special guests. We have some
people from the local community too. I want to
mention a few of their names. I think one of the
things that made this meeting unique and
different has been its participation and
cooperation with the local festival, the Arts and
Science Matrix Midland. We have with us some
people from Matrix Midland, and I'd like to
introduce them to you at this time. We had a science
subcommittee that planned this portion of the
program, So if you didn't like it, then it's our
responsibility. If you did, say so. But not yet.
Where is he seated? Pat McCurdy, would you stand
up, please? Pat McCurdy and his wife. His wife's
with him there. Pat and I and another gentleman,
Richard Dalton, who could not be with us today, did
the planning basically for this program. But of
course, planning would be nothing without
execution and without the great resources and the
great facilities available here in the community
of Midland with the Center for the Arts and also
with organizations like Matrix. And we have a
spokesperson here from Matrix who will say a few
words and give you Matrix greetings. And when I
introduce her, I'd like you to not only welcome
her, but also show your appreciation for Matrix.
She too is here with her husband, Herbert Doan,
seated at the table here of Doan Associates in
Midland. And I present to you now one of the leaders
in Matrix, Junior Doan, please.
Nice to see a crowd of your size in Midland. I'd like
to add my welcome to you all, to Midland, to Matrix
Midland, to our fair community. I hope you're all
briefed by now that Matrix Midland is a 19-day
festival of the arts, sciences, and humanities.
For a speech to Rotary, I researched 3,500
festivals, and I finally concluded that Matrix is
unique. What makes it unique is that we're trying
to show the arts-science relationship, the
arts-science blend. Basically, I feel that's
what science fiction is about, combining science
and the art of writing to produce science fiction.
Certainly, science fiction is a blend of science,
creativity, and imagination. From earliest
days, science fiction saw directions in science
and projected them into the future. Often, they
proved correct. Many of our creative people in
Midland are avid science fiction fans. Science
fiction seems to appeal to the creative in at least
a certain sector of the population. However,
rejection of original ideas, as you all probably
know better than I, is common in many fields, in
science, in art, as well as writing and science
fiction. I'd like to remind you critics about what
Frank Herbert said this morning. I don't guess you
were there, but he commented that his first Dune
book was turned down 20 times before being
accepted for publication. That's a lot, huh? The
same thing happened in a different area in a
different way to Professor Notta. He developed a
new theory of polymers, and he presented his first
paper on this new theory to the American Chemical
Society for publication. It was rejected. That
might not mean anything to you, but the same theory
later went on to win a Nobel Prize. Never mind the
difficulties. It takes commitment and skill to be
a scientist, a writer, or build a festival. Just as
science fiction writers and critics meet to share
and help each other, Matrix has the support and
effort of what I call our helping hands, people who
like the idea of Matrix, who invest their
creativity, originality, and effort. Joe DeBolt
is one of these hands and an important one,
chairman of your research association meeting,
co-chairman with Pat McCurry of the science
fiction program at Matrix this year, we depended
on him and his very high level ability and the
committee's high level ability to bring the
program that I hope you have seen and will continue
to go to. In the same vein, one of the great things
about MATRIX is that many groups in Midland play an
active role. We have as co-participants dozens
and dozens of institutions. I was talking with our
table just now about some of them. In addition to
meetings such as yours, we've had an ACS regional
meeting, the Turner-Alfrey Polymer Conference,
which has just ended. The Michigan Museum
Association Conference is coming up next week.
the michigan dance association starts today the
michigan weavers guild is uh weekend after this
and now we have your own so we really appreciate
your being here and and part of our terrific
community and our special matrix midland and i
hope you'll like it well enough to come back again
thank you
Thank you, Junior. And now I should say a word and
thanks, too, to the Science Fiction Research
Association officers and the fine cooperation we
got from them in the planning and execution of the
meeting. And from this portion of the program on, I
will turn over the program to our distinguished
president, Patricia Warwick.
As I start, I know you will all want to join me in
applause for Joe and Denise DeBolt and their staff
for the absolutely marvelous job that they've
done on this.
Science Christian Research Association is 13
years old. And I've been coming for 10 years. And
for me, one of the exciting parts is the pilgrim
banquet or luncheon, whatever it may be, and the
presentation of the winner of the Pilgrim Award.
And we always have this suspense. Who may it be? And
you look at who is here, is not in the program. You
try to figure this out. and you're about to know the
answer. Let me keep you in suspense just a moment
longer when I pause to invite you all to come to a
reception after the Herbert Lecture this evening
in room 417. This is a hospitality room. We'll have
a bar, and at least up to the point, it will not be a
cash bar but a free bar, and I hope you will all come
and join us then. Now, on to the Pilgrim Award, an
award for outstanding contribution to
criticism. Criticism is still alive and well. If
you were at the Jim Gunn conference, which I know
many of you were for the morning session, you
realize how lively it is. I can remember 10 years
ago when I attended my first meeting at Penn State
and the critics and the writers got into a shout
fest and we still maintain our high level of
performance. As a matter of fact, the chairman of
the Pilgrim Committee is Tom Dunn, and I'm about to
introduce him after this morning's session. He
came to me and said that he thought it would be
appropriate for him to defer to A.J. Budris and let
him present the Pilgrim Award. But I insisted, no,
that Tom Dunn must do it, and so I give you Tom Dunn.
Praise then darkness and creation unfinished.
Colleagues, friends, every year since 1970, the
Science Fiction Research Association has
presented an award to someone for an outstanding
contribution to the field of science fiction
scholarship. The first such Pilgrim Award was
presented in 1970 to the late J.O. Bailey, author
of Pilgrims Through Space and Time, a pioneering
work published in 1947, the first full-scale
academic study devoted to the entire genre of
science fiction. This year, we present the 14th
award to a no less deserving pioneer, as you shall
hear. But first, let me take a minute to thank the
members of my committee for their conscientious,
informed, and often impassioned deliberation.
Make that always impassioned deliberation. Val
Bregge in Montreal. Will McNally in Fullerton,
California, Curtis Smith in Houston, and Carolyn
Wendell in Rochester.
Good work. Yes,
thank you. Good work, people. My sincere thanks
for a job well done. And thank you also for the
wisdom of this year's choice. He's a courageous
and principled man. And he's a first-rate
scholar, world class. And he's made an
outstanding contribution to SF scholarship. And
he's a decent man. He's a kind man. He's a mensch.
And he's a good teacher. He's won three awards for
meritorious teaching, including Teacher of the
Year. And as soon as I start getting specific here,
you'll all know who he is. A few more appropriate
adjectives then, and then an end to the suspense.
He's tough and he's hard and lean. He's worked in
factories. He's worked on tugboats. He was a naval
and intelligence officer in the Strategic Air
Command, participating in operations involving
spy missions over the Soviet Union. He graduated
magna cum laude from Amherst in 1955. And soon
after his three-year hitch, he got a PhD in English
and American Lit at Stanford. I see heads nodding
now. And was invited to stay on after his degree as
full-time faculty, the first Stanford graduate
so honored in 33 years. In 1961, he taught one of the
very first university-level courses on science
fiction in the USA, disputably the first course,
incidentally, and began a career as critic,
scholar, teacher, social and political
activist, which continues to this day without
abatement to be astonishing and legendary in
scope and volume and depth. In dozens of books and
articles, he has given scholarly attention to
Hamlet, Renaissance drama, Melville,
Hawthorne, Darwin, Lenin, the youth movement,
the Vietnam War, J.G. Ballard, Lovecraft. His
anthology, Future Perfect, and now the cat's out
of the bag, fair. Future Perfect, 19th century
science fiction, is, I am told, still the
definitive collection. In its field, but
continuing on, The Politics of Literature,
American Prison Literature and Prison Songs,
Jack London, Fitz James O'Brien, Class Structure
and the Teaching of English, The Need for Reform in
Prison Education, American Plans for Space
Weaponry, and in a jam of a book about which more
later, Robert Heinlein, to hit most of the high
points. He has taught at Stanford, Rutgers,
Connecticut Wesleyan, Yale, Venseramos
College, the Free University of Paris, Johns
Hopkins, and San Jose's Department of Adult
Education. He has refereed for some 25 university
and scholarly presses, and his articles have
appeared in over 60 learned journals,
anthologies, and news publications, including
The Futurist, Saturday Review, Science Fiction
Studies, Extrapolation, Progressive Labor, The
Washington Post, The Journal for the Society for
the Study of Multi-Ethnic Literature of the US,
The Chronicle of Higher Education, The Village
Voice, and on and on and on. And if you don't know who
he is by now, you should kick yourself. He has made
over 100 public presentations in addition to this
list and at more than 50 colleges and
universities, and that's not counting an
uncountable number of television and radio
appearances. Oh, yes, and he's made three films,
including with Anthony Boucher and Ted Sturgeon,
I believe, a history of science fiction for NET
made in 1966. Fellowships, grants and aids,
awards have come his way and continue to come. I
said astonishing, didn't I? I also said
legendary. How legendary? Well, his early
interest in the civil rights movement turned to
growing concern over US Southeast Asian
involvement. And while many of us, to our later
regret, waffled and tap danced circumspectly
through the Vietnam tragedy, certainly through
the early years for some, this English teacher
threw himself headlong into the struggle to stop
it and into the contemporaneous and growing
movement for social and political change. In
1966, he resigned his commission as captain in the
Air Force Reserve in specific protest against the
war. Now an avowed communist, he debated the
president of Rockford College on the hidden power
structure of American universities. And in the
next five years, he published and lectured
tirelessly on the war, the politics of
revolution, the nature of American
institutions, universities, foreign policy,
and economic imperialism. In 1971, he gathered
together every major document from the student
and protest movement and published them in a
large, inexpensive, soft cover volume. And
though it was regrettably heavily censored, From
the Movement Toward Revolution should be
applauded by all those who cherish academic
freedom. As you well know, not all do. Our award
recipient was fired for his political activism.
His defense, The Real Issues in My Case, is the
cover article of Change, the magazine of higher
learning, June 1972, and this is better amplified
in his autobiography. Some regard this episode as
just punishment, others as cruel, not to mention
unconstitutional, martyrdom. Either way, he
endured it with grace and later prevailed. and
many far to the right of the far left now regard most
or all of his stern criticism of american
economics and government policies to have been
justified a legend then of personal courage and
political concern which testifies to his
singular excellence in all this Is all this
relevant to his work with science fiction? You bet
your life it is. He's never seen the inside of an
ivory tower, or if he has, it doesn't show. He
integrates literature, politics, human and
humane goals, his vast experience with America
and Americans, and he pours it all into his
tireless labors, which, in 1980, gave us a
definitive essay on the massive canon of the dean,
Robert A. Heinlein, subtitled America as Science
Fiction. is a brilliant study of, and I quote,
lucid and trenchant analysis, in the words of a
rigorous critic. And again, quote, bristling
with insights, end quote. And here, it seems to me,
is the harvest of his life. Having paid heavy dues,
He has written a sensitive book without
condescension or petulance, a forceful critique
of American values by way of a thorough analysis of
a major exponent of those values. Written in a
plain spoken, deft, clear-eyed prose, informed
by vast erudition with deep roots in the American
soil. Okay, here we go. For all that he has done for
us, capital U, capital S, let us now praise Bruce
Franklin.
Well,
thank you so much. I must say after that, I'm sort of
at a loss for words. This is really wonderful, and
that introduction is a hard thing to follow. I
wanted to talk some about what I see as the history
of our field, some things that happened in the
past, what changed it, and where we are now. And I
was going to cite as an example of something that I
thought was rather staggering, a minor little
fact, but what was said about Frank Herbeck topped
it. That is, back in those primitive days of 1964,
when I had Future Perfect pretty much ready to go, I
submitted it to publishers. It was rejected. by 17
publishers, not as many as the 20 that rejected
Frank Herbert. But the interesting thing was the
reason for the rejection, which in case after case
will basically boil down to this. There is a
science fiction market and there is an academic
market, and there's no possible way that you can
put the two things together. They're absolutely
incompatible. Well, by around 1965 or 60s, no,
about 1960, I'm sorry, 1968, it finally got
published in 66, around 68, 69, some of those same
publishers were writing to ask if I would do a book
for the academic science fiction market, which I
guess we represent. Well, by 68, I think, and
certainly by now, would pretty much won the
battle. The war, maybe. I guess there were still
battles going on. Science fiction now is
essentially a fixture of the American academy. It
is part of the environment. We are no longer, for
the most part, considered the loonies and
eccentrics that we were looked on back in, say, 61,
62, 63, 64, 65, when we first started teaching
science fiction courses. It's a lot easier to get
things published now. we no longer have to
legitimize the existence of our field. That is, I
think, generally regarded as some kind of
legitimate thing. Although, of course, those of
us who are in colleges and universities know the
kinds of attacks that it is subjected to by people
who have very different values about what
literature is all about. That's in the academy.
And part of the reason, of course, is because the
importance of science fiction itself can now
hardly be in doubt. I think that any thinking
person in America today knows that science
fiction forms part of the center of the
imagination of our entire culture, for better and
for worse. So that our job now, I think, is very
different from the job back in the, let's say, 58,
when the science fiction seminar first gets
started in the MLA or the early 60s. It really is no
longer essentially a job of legitimizing our
field, legitimizing the serious study of science
fiction. We're in the maturity of our field now. We
need to define, to distinguish certain things.
And essentially, and this is really the main theme
of what I'm going to say, our role is now critical in
every sense of that word. And we really ought to
think about what that word means to us. Let's
think, just to get some perspective, of some
examples of science fiction within our culture,
not necessarily the things that we pick up in the
bookstore that are labeled science fiction or the
movies that we see that are labeled science
fiction. I think it's safe to say that the most
expensive piece of science fiction which has been
produced so far is Epcot. It's a billion-dollar
center, the experimental prototype community of
tomorrow, that ultra-optimistic science
fiction created by some gigantic multinational
corporations of the 1980s. Wall Street itself
echoes with rhetoric and visions and slogans,
consciously evoking the wow, gosh, thrills of the
most simple-minded science fiction. Focus on the
future is emblazoned across the top of a full-page
futuristic electronic environment advertising
a new institution with the most ironic name. It's a
little over a year old now. The New York Futures
Exchange. Dean Witter Reynolds asked us to put our
own present and future wealth in the hands of what
it calls its team of futures experts called,
capital T, capital F, the Futurists. The Kansas
City Board of Trade advertises itself with a jazzy
logo and the slogan, the future is here. Northrop
shows itself as a futuristic city under the bold
heading, Northrop engineers in the 21st century.
The science fiction hype of high technology
corporations becomes so frantic that they
themselves begin complaining. This is a quote
from the New York Times of April 28, 1981. We still
haven't licked the Buck Rogers problem yet, says
James L. Donovan, Coherent, this is Coherent
Radiation, used to be called Coherent Radiation,
Coherent's chief financial officer, referring
to the struggle of Coherent and many other laser
manufacturers to overcome the science fiction
image that has been created for lasers as exotic,
powerful, and dangerous devices. Curious, that
sounds a little dated now, two years later, the
reasons there were. We heard something about it
last night. We'll hear something more about it in a
little while. While billions of dollars pour into
the video game industry with its ecstatic visions
and thrilling beeps of global, cosmic and
universal combat and destruction, other
billions are taken out of our paychecks to finance
the militarization of space. which is sold to
Congress and the public with the most bizarre and
implausible science fiction scenarios. And
we're still paying for the science fiction
visions that we could conquer Vietnam by
utilizing an electronic battlefield, people
sniffers, and chemical warfare weapons
exotically labeled Agent White, Agent Blue, and
Agent Orange, which I guess brings us back to
Midland. I
have a little cluster, a little cluster right out
of the middle of 1980. This is the science fiction
environment in which we live. The first is a
quotation from an investment bulletin called
High Technology Investments, April, May, 1980.
These little companies have seen a vision of the
future and have set out to capture it under the
leadership of a few brainy, vigorous, and worldly
people. The values being tested are
technological wit, courage, stamina, greed, and
glory, right out of the 19th century, plunging
into the 21st. Here's one from the New York Times
the next month, June 18th. The Central
Intelligence Agency's secret experiments on new
methods of espionage have included using trained
seals and otters, monitoring the bioplasma
fields of agents, and testing the sonar of
electric fish, according to documents newly made
public. The experimenters also worked on
developing such weapons as a poison pellet,
electric stun guns, calibrated blackjacks, and
marshmallow barrages.
The intelligence agency's research and
development staff was also interested in the
secret life of plants, peace pills, and an array of
other futuristic scenes. Two months later, at the
Democratic Party convention, then President
Jimmy Carter, in his acceptance speech,
projected two alternative science fictions as
the core of his acceptance speech. His governing
metaphor was that there were two futures. There's
a quote from his acceptance speech. The president
is the servant of today, but his true constituency
is the future. That's why the election of 1980 is so
important. It's a choice between two futures.
Children born this year will come of age in the 21st
century. The time to shape the world of the year
2100 is now. And then he gives his own, the future he
represents, a future of confidence and hope and a
good life, blah, blah, blah. And then the other
one. But there's another possible future. And
that other future I see despair, a world of tinsel
and make-believe, a fantasy world. Same month.
Wall Street Journal has an article on what to them
was a new phenomenon, video games. Quote, video
madness is sweeping the country with flashing
colors, booming explosions, nerve-tingling
action, and little electronic monsters like the
invaders from space that adorn this article. And
there we were in the day pages of the Wall Street
Journal, a little... the little critters from
various video games. Of course, that was all this
1980. And for most of the Wall Street Journal
readers, that was then news. That was before some
of those readers would be investing billions more
dollars in the video game industry. By 1983, this
year, a few months ago, March, we see how fast and
far we came just on that little front in three
years. It's about President Reagan's headline.
Reagan says, video games provide the right stuff.
President Reagan had some kind words for video
games, which he said are helping to train a new
generation of jet pilots. Mr. Reagan, speaking to
a group of math and science students at the Walt
Disney Epcot Center here, said video games have
helped many young people develop, quote,
incredible hand, eye, and brain coordination.
Mr. Reagan said, computerized video screens
resemble radar screens in jet cockpits. Watch a
12-year-old take evasive action and score
multiple hits while playing space invaders, and
you will appreciate the skills of tomorrow's
pilots, the president said. Well, of course, that
is part of what we see really, I think, as a contest
between two different forms of science fiction
having to do with space. I did an article... It
appeared in the beginning of 82, called Invasion
of Space, about what was developing along the
lines of the militarization of space, which
Battle stations in space bristling with energy
beam cannons, hunter-killer satellites firing
grid-like projectiles too tenuous to be
targeted, swarms of automated space mines
shielding orbited command posts that direct
squadrons of diminutive space cruisers. Well,
this kind of scene that once gave respectable
science fiction a bad name is now part of the future
being planned for us. A different kind of science
fiction in which the human race matures, unites,
and together explores the cosmos now seems less
probable than it did just a few years ago. As
recently as 1975, US Apollo astronauts linked up
with Soviet Soyuz cosmonauts in a handshake that
momentarily made space a zone of scientific
cooperation and even friendship but today the u.s
program for scientific exploration of space has
been almost entirely usurped by a program for the
military exploitation of space high place
pentagon officials now talk of possible space
battles between the united states and the soviet
union sometime between 1990 And 2010. Well, see,
the interrelations between our field and all
this, the actual environment we as human beings
have our existence, I think, is pretty obvious.
Maybe there's some other things that are less
obvious. I presented a paper in December at the MLA
about late 19th and early 20th century science
fiction, the construction of the myths. that have
a lot to do with our culture. And it focused quite a
bit on Edgar Rice Burroughs, who, after all, when
we think about Star Wars and so forth, I mean,
Burroughs was the one who really got the whole
thing of subsidiary rights and all the little
animals and creatures and so forth and the
t-shirts and candy going as science fiction adds a
multi-billion dollar spin-off industry. I
talked about Burroughs' particular vision of the
world and how the myths in Burroughs have their
influence in our culture. Then, when was it? Oh, it
was just a few months later. Again, it was March 83.
People probably saw this article in Parade, What
Famous People Read. uh and they and they
interviewed the president reagan about uh his
reading uh i realized all my reading left me an
abiding belief in the triumph of good over evil uh
and what was the main thing he cited edgar rice
borrows his quote from president reagan not only
his tarzan stories but also his science fiction
john carter of mars the warlord of mars all the john
carter books There's another kind of relation.
It's interesting how little we have taught, even
here, I know there's going to be a panel on this
tomorrow, but so far, about what is, after all, the
number one fact of our existence. The fact that
with our science, Having delved into the very
forces that constitute matter, we have now
created the ability to exterminate at least human
civilization as we know it, probably the human
race, many times over. Now, there's been some very
interesting writing on the psychological
effects of this, because we know that... In order
to function in our life, it is necessary for us to
screen out a lot of information. We have to narrow
the information that comes through to our
consciousness. Part of this process has been
called a process of numbing parts of our mind to all
the data that are constantly coming in as input.
And one of the striking phenomena about a world
enveloped in nuclearism with this threat to our
existence is so much of that is screened out, that
this numbing does take place. In the classroom I
had a most startling demonstration of this,
giving a quiz on those, and they've just read some
short stories this week, and I usually give just a
brief quiz before we talk about things, so they get
to say something before I do. One of the stories was
All You Zombies. Another was I Have No Mouth and I
Must Scream. And there were only three students in
a fairly large class that saw the nuclear bomb in
either of those two stories. And of course,
they're central in both. There are many critics of
science fiction writing about all these zombies
who don't see exactly how important the bombs are
there. So this interface between the literature
we teach and the living environment in which we
have our being is not a trivial matter. We too, I
think, do a lot of numbing in our own consciousness
of what it is that we do with science fiction.
Let's go back to that time when science fiction was
winning its acceptance as something more or less
respectable. Why was it then? What were the
special historical factors then that made it? I
think 68's a good date, if we're going to pick a
date. It's a little questionable to pick an exact
date, but 68's a very good one. And I think the 68,
I'm sure most people here remember, what was
there, talk about a sign of the times. No, Judith
Merrill remembers it. The advertisement in
Galaxy and then also elsewhere, I think it first
appeared in June 68. And there were two lists of
people, one on one page, one on the other, 72 on one
side, 82 on the other, all science fiction
writers. 72 said, we the undersigned believe the
United States must remain in Vietnam to fulfill
its responsibilities to the people of that
country. And the 82 on the other side said, we
oppose the participation of the United States in
the war in Vietnam. That was the context of 1968.
was the year in which the modern language
association finally allowed us in the science
fiction seminar to have this big forum at MLA,
which was very well attended, really marked the
stamp of acceptance on what we do. I remember I was
chairing that forum, but there was a problem. And
that is, there was also a big sit-in in the same
hotel because Louis Kahn, if people remember
this, had been arrested for putting up a poster
with scotch tape on a marble pillow. And I had to
kind of shuttle back and forth between the sit-in
and the forum. Now, were these unrelated events?
Was it just by chance? that science fiction began
to be recognized as something very important to
our social experience in this particular time,
and especially in 1968, maybe the year right
before and right after? Was it coincidence? that
at the very same time that science fiction was
getting accepted as something which belonged in
the university, that other forms of popular
literature were also being accepted, that
literature by non-white people was for the first
time getting into the curriculum of the
universities, or rather the first time since the
1930s, that literature by women began to be looked
at? Or was there something that had happened to our
society that made us even... us academic dummies
who had been brought up largely on new criticism
made us realize that literature had something to
do with the world in which we live.
We have claimed too little for our field, but our
claims, I think, have also been indiscriminate.
And partly they've been indiscriminate because
we were trying so hard to make things seem
legitimate, academic, respectable, and working
within the university environment. And
remember, this was the university that came out of
the 50s. This wasn't the university of the 1930s.
This was the university that came out of the 50s,
working within that very straight environment,
trying to make people see that science fiction was
so important. Well, we were guilty of a lot of
things, of being very defensive, apologetic,
trying to use the style of our colleagues and our
professions, that obscurantist style, in order
to make what we did seem to be just as legitimate as
what the other people did, and so on. But we have
won. There's no way that science fiction is going
to be removed from the curriculum. It was
wonderful news to hear the size of this
organization, which has now grown to over 400
dues-paying, card-carrying members. And I think
it's very predictable that the organization is
going to have a healthy future, that science
fiction forces are going to continue to
proliferate in the colleges as they have in the
high schools. I'd go further, though. I say we've
claimed too little. I think that science fiction
courses may be, or to be more precise, could be the
most important courses taught in literature
departments. I would make that claim. I think that
science fiction courses could be the most
important courses taught in literature
departments. And I would bet that probably most of
us here who aren't academics secretly believe
that, whether we admit it to our college
colleagues or not.
Because when you think about it, most of the
supposedly great literature that we were trained
in was about relatively trivial concerns
compared to the concerns of science fiction. We
get back to this word critical. The really
critical questions, the crises of our age, what it
is to be a human being in the waning years of the 20th
century, what other literature really deals with
this? Martellus.
who also began a course in science fiction in that
1961-1962 academic year, wrote an article in 1974
in the College English Association chapbook
called Science Fiction, The Academic Awakening,
which I think was called The Science Fiction
Course Reconsidered, or I'm sorry, Some Thoughts
on the Course in Science Fiction, and he had
written an earlier article. And in that, Marx said
this,
quote, I have a great sympathy for these
traditional interests and hope that there will
always be room for them in colleges and
universities. Well, that in itself is a very
interesting statement. You begin to say, well,
maybe the shoe's on the other foot or something.
And as most of us know, one of the reasons that
science fiction courses do arouse considerable
animosity among some of our, quote, colleagues is
that their courses are there languishing with
three or four students while We can't find rooms
big enough to teach the science fiction course.
There are other phenomena, too, that most of the
traditional courses, the students who are in that
course do not include any students except for some
graduate students who really are readers of that
literature. Whereas anyone who's ever taught
science fiction knows you get a fair number of
people in that class who are real readers of that,
really read this stuff. Well, Marx said he has
sympathy for these traditional interests, hope
there'll always be room for them in the colleges
and universities, and goes on, it would be a sad day
for all of us if there were not. And frankly, I would
hate to see Arthur Clarke replace John Milton, but
we need not make this either-or kind of choice. He
says, I would hate to see Arthur Clarke replace
John Milton. and then he goes on what i'm expecting
someday is a work of the magnitude of paradise lost
which seen in the context of its time we could
describe as at least akin to science fiction like
paradise lost this major work of science fiction
will present a coherent vision of the universe and
man's place in it and the ultimate meaning of it
all. Now, Mark Hillegas wouldn't want people
reading Arthur C. Clarke in place of Milton. I
don't really think that that's the adequate
comparison. I don't really think that that's the
choice, if there were a choice to be made. The
comparison with Milton is all off stapleton.
There is the imagination who took the latest
scientific understanding of the cosmos in which
we live at that time, and it hasn't been modified
that all much since then, peopled this cosmos,
took that cosmology and peopled it, tried to
present an imaginative construction adequate to
the scientific knowledge of the world in which we
live. If we had to choose between Paradise Lost
and, say, Star Maker, I wouldn't hesitate a
second. I really wouldn't. If we had to choose,
whatever the choice, I mean, it's a little
hypothetical. How's the choice going to be? You
have a desert island. We could do that one. It's
kind of Sophie's choice. Which one of these books
will we burn? I don't think it really counts. But if
we had to choose, I don't know. I don't know what
other people would. I wouldn't hesitate. I'd say
Star Maker is something that's very important to
us. Paradise Lost, much of its interest is now
historical. Stapleton's cosmology conforms to
modern science, but much more important than that
is the relevance of Stapleton's vision to the
crises.